[ZIP 222] Transparent Zcash Extensions (#248)
zcash/zips: zip-0222.rst

Bitcoin to encumber transparent outputs. But even this is insufficient as-is for some
desired use cases. In particular, the Bolt protocol [#zip-draft-bolt]_ requires a custom
opcode, because the script system does not have the necessary primitives; this requires a
change to the consensus rules.

Shielded programmability would require significant changes across the ecosystem. In the
interim, we propose in this ZIP a transparent form of Zcash extensibility that could later
be migrated to shielded programmability.

Conventions
===========

We use the following notation as defined in the Zcash protocol specification
[#spec-notation]_, reproduced here for convenience:

- length(*S*) means the length of (number of elements in) *S*.

- { *a* .. *b* } means the set or type of integers from *a* through *b* inclusive.

- *a* || *b* means the concatenation of sequences *a* then *b*.

We reproduce the following conversion function from ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_:

- I2LEOSP\ :sub:`l`\ (*k*) is the byte sequence *S* of length *l*/8 representing in little-endian order the
  integer *k* in range {0..2\ :sup:`l`\ -1}.

Specification
=============

Transparent extension
---------------------

> A transparent extension is identified by a numeric ``type``. A transparent extension may

Reviewer: `type` is an odd name to use here - the "type" is just a unique numeric identifier, correct? Also, this seems like an unusual thing to start with - the "type" is just used to identify which extension handler is dispatched to.

also have several modes of operation, corresponding to different kinds of encumbrance
within the extension's overall protocol.

A transparent extension mode is defined by four properties (in addition to ``type``):

- A numeric ``mode``.
- A byte sequence ``predicate`` containing an encoding of the predicate that is
  prefix-free within this ``(type, mode)``.
- A non-malleable byte sequence ``witness`` containing an encoding of evidence
  satisfying the predicate that is prefix-free within this ``(type, mode)``.
- A deterministic verification algorithm ``tze_verify`` that takes as arguments ``mode``,
  ``predicate``, ``witness``, and a context object providing deterministic public
  information about the transaction as well as the block chain (up to and including the
  block that the transaction is mined in). It returns ``true`` if the predicate is
  satisfied, and ``false`` otherwise.

ZIPs that define a new transparent extension must completely specify all four of these
properties for each defined mode.

The lengths of ``predicate`` and ``witness`` are not required to be constant length, but

> MUST be solely determined by the pair ``(type, mode)``.

Author: This might be too restrictive for some extensions. For example, if an extension has some k-of-n component, then the length of the encoding would depend on values stored within the encoding itself, in addition to `(type, mode)`. This would still be compatible with a prefix-free encoding, but nodes wouldn't be able to enforce length validity without parsing the encoding. Maybe this could be handled by extensions having a light-weight length-checking function that could be run at block parsing time, and then full contextual parsing happens later during predicate validation.

Reviewer: Should this be deleted entirely, or is converting MUST to SHOULD more appropriate?

Reviewer 2: I'm in favour of deleting it entirely.

``precondition``       precondition encumbering ``amount``  ``tze_data``
====================== ==================================== ===============

Consensus rules
---------------

Once the TODO network upgrade activates, the following new consensus rules are enforced:

- For each ``(outpoint, witness)`` pair in ``tze_inputs``:

  - ``outpoint`` MUST reference a precondition of the same type and mode in an already-mined
    transaction.
  - ``tze_verify(mode, precondition, witness, context)`` MUST return ``true``.

- If a transaction has non-empty ``tze_inputs`` and non-empty ``tze_outputs``, then every
  element in both fields MUST have the same ``type``.

- Non-coinbase transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent inputs
  - nonempty shielded inputs
  - nonempty ``tze_inputs``

- Transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent outputs
  - nonempty shielded outputs
  - nonempty ``tze_outputs``

- All ``amount`` field values of ``tze_output`` records MUST be nonnegative and less than
  MAX_MONEY.

- The sum of amounts associated with all transparent, shielded, and TZE outputs within 

>   a transaction MUST NOT exceed the sum of the amounts associated with transaction inputs.

Reviewer: Please verify that my update here is correct.

>   a transaction MUST NOT exceed the sum of the amounts associated with transaction inputs.

Reviewer 2: See my other comment.

Changes to signatures over transaction digests
----------------------------------------------

The newly added parts of the transaction will be included in transaction 
digests for signatures. See [#zip-0244]_ for the specification of the new
digests.

Rationale
=========

Transactions that have both TZE inputs and outputs are required to use a single extension
type, in order to prevent cross-protocol attacks. The downside is that this prevents all
TZE-encumbered value from being spent directly into a different TZE type; the value needs
to go through a regular address in between. This restriction might be relaxed in future
ZIPs for specific combinations of ``(type, mode)`` pairs that have been analyzed for

> cross-protocol attacks, but we opt here for a fail-safe default behaviour.

Author: In a second paragraph, note that we don't prevent transactions from having TZE inputs with different modes as long as there are no TZE outputs, and vice versa; this should be low-risk because any horizontal interaction would require a TZE input or output to access an adjacent TZE input or output via its context, which would be explicit in the extension's ZIP and therefore already analysed.

Reviewer: Just modes, or both modes and extensions? The latter should be fine, right?

Reviewer: @str4d I've updated this, please check that I've got it right.

- TODO: Maybe also disallow regular (transparent, Sprout, and Sapling) spends/outputs in
  transactions that have TZE inputs and outputs?

An earlier draft version of this ZIP stored the payloads inside transparent inputs and
outputs. Although this had the advantage of not requiring a transaction format change,
the consensus rules were significantly more complicated, and the design coupled the
extension logic too tightly to the transparent address logic. Instead, this ZIP uses

> dedicated transaction fields.

Author: ```suggestion
dedicated transaction fields, and a separate unspent output set.
```

Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This ZIP assumes that the base transaction format is non-malleable. However, the
``precondition`` and ``witness`` byte sequences are treated here as opaque. It is the
responsibility of ``tze_verify`` to enforce the following:

> - ``witness`` MUST be non-malleable: any malleation MUST cause ``tze_verify`` to
>   return ``false``.

Author: ```suggestion
- ``precondition`` MUST be non-malleable: any malleation MUST cause ``tze_verify`` to
  return ``false``.
```
This would likely be implemented by extensions using a transaction digest internally as part of their protocols.

`witness` doesn't need to be non-malleable any longer; we should note here why (that it will be treated as "authorizing data", and not part of the standard transaction ID).

           Sean Bowe <sean@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2019-07-01
  License: MIT

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200
[#zip-0200]_.

The term "prefix-free" in this document is to be interpreted as to mean that no valid
encoding of a value may have the same binary representation as any prefix of
the binary encoding of another value of the same type.

The term "non-malleable" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 244
[#zip-0244]_.

The value MAX_MONEY is as defined in section 5.3 **Constants** of the Zcash Protocol
Specification [#protocol]_. 

Abstract
========

This proposal defines a modification to the consensus rules that enables complex forms of
transparent output preconditions to be deployed in network upgrades. This in turn enables the
creation of "transparent Zcash extensions" that augment the network's functionality in a
carefully-defined and auditable fashion.

Motivation
==========

> Zcash supports a limited set preconditions that may be imposed upon how funds, both

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Zcash supports a limited set of preconditions that may be imposed upon how funds, both
```

> transparent and shielded, may be spent. Spending limitation on transparent funds are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transparent and shielded, may be spent. Spending limitations on transparent funds are
```

defined by what may be encoded in Bitcoin script, and spending of shielded funds is
even more restricted. As such, some use cases (for example, integration of BOLT support
[#zip-draft-bolt]_) are not yet supportable. 

> Transparent zcash extensions are intended to make it possible to incrementally

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Transparent Zcash extensions are intended to make it possible to incrementally
```

> add new functionality without modifying interpretation of the existing bitcoin

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
add new functionality without modifying interpretation of the existing Bitcoin
```

as laboratories for evaluating demand for functionality which may eventually be 
candidates for inclusion in the consensus rules for shielded transactions.

Conventions
===========

We use the following notation as defined in the Zcash protocol specification
[#spec-notation]_, reproduced here for convenience:

- length(*S*) means the length of (number of elements in) *S*.

- { *a* .. *b* } means the set or type of integers from *a* through *b* inclusive.

- *a* || *b* means the concatenation of sequences *a* then *b*.

We reproduce the following conversion function from ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_:

- :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell(k)}` is the byte sequence *S* of length :math:`\ell/8` representing in little-endian order the
  integer *k* in range :math:`\{0..2^\ell -1\}`.

Definitions
===========

encumber
    To set conditions that must be satisfied in order to spend some or all of a 
    transaction's outputs.

precondition
    A challenge that must be satisfied in order to gain spending authority over 
    an encumbered amount. 

witness
    Evidence to be evaluated against the challenge encoded by a precondition.

Specification
=============

> Transparent extension

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Transparent Extension
```

> ---------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
----------------------
```

> Transparent extensions are modular software components that are distributed as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Transparent Extensions are modular software components that are distributed as
```

> part of the zcashd consensus code. An extension defines interpretation rules

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
part of the code of consensus implementations. An extension defines interpretation rules
```

for several new pieces of data that are included as part of a transaction. 

> A transparent extension is identified by a numeric ``type``. A transparent

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Transparent Extension is identified by a numeric ``type``. A transparent
```

> A transparent extension is identified by a numeric ``type``. A transparent
> extension may also have several modes of operation, corresponding to different
> kinds of encumbrance within the extension's overall protocol. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Transparent Extension is identified by a numeric ``type``. A Transparent
Extension may also have several modes of operation, corresponding to different
kinds of encumbrance within the extension's overall protocol. 
```

The following three values are made available to the extension (in addition to ``type``):

- A numeric ``mode``.
- A byte sequence ``precondition`` containing an encoding of the precondition that is
  prefix-free within this ``(type, mode)``.

> - A byte sequence ``witness`` containing an encoding of evidence
>   purporting to satisfy the precondition that is prefix-free within this ``(type, mode)``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A byte sequence ``witness`` containing an encoding of evidence
  purporting to satisfy the precondition. This encoding MUST be prefix-free within this ``(type, mode)``.
```

The extension is responsible for providing mode-specific parsing and

> serialization of these data fields. In addition, the extension MUST implement A

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
serialization of these data fields. In addition, the extension MUST implement a
```

> serialization of these data fields. In addition, the extension MUST implement A
> deterministic verification algorithm ``tze_verify`` that takes as arguments
> ``mode``, ``precondition``, ``witness``, and a context object providing
> deterministic public information about the transaction as well as the block
> chain (up to and including the block that the transaction is mined in). It
> returns ``true`` if the precondition is satisfied in that context, and
> ``false`` otherwise. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
serialization of these data fields. In addition, the extension MUST implement a
deterministic verification algorithm ``tze_verify`` that takes as arguments
``mode``, ``precondition``, ``witness``, and a context object. The context object 
provides deterministic public information about the transaction as well as the block
chain (up to and including the block that the transaction is mined in). It returns 
``true`` if the precondition is satisfied in that context, and ``false`` otherwise. 
```

An extension MAY request that arbitrary public information about the
transaction and block chain be included in the context object provided to it;
these requirements MUST be satisfied by a caller integrating the extension at
the integration point. Extensions SHOULD restrict the information requested to

> that which may be provided by node implementations in an efficient manner.

Reviewer 3: Can we clarify what is meant by 'efficient' in practice? I read this as, 'the consensus implementation that wants to support these extensions should not have to do a bunch of other work (implementation-wise or compute-wise) to support these, the data the extension needs should generally be readily available to a consensus-validating node already', if that's the case maybe we can be more explicit about that.

ZIPs that define a new transparent extension MUST completely specify the
structure of all three of the specified values for each defined mode, as well
as the behavior of ``tze_verify`` and any contextual information required.

> The encoded forms of ``precondition`` and ``witness`` are not required to be
> constant length, but MUST be solely determined by the pair ``(type, mode)``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The encoded forms of ``precondition`` and ``witness`` are not required to be
constant-length, but MUST be solely determined by the pair ``(type, mode)``.
```

The introduction of TZEs by this ZIP produces a new transparent unspent
outpoint set, distinct from the UTXO set, such that indices into this set of

> outpoints may be referred to by TZE inpoints in spending transactions.

Reviewer 3: 'inpoints' have not been defined or referenced in this document

Encoding in transactions
------------------------

We define a new transaction format that contains two new fields:

- ``tze_outputs``: A list of pairs of:

  - The value being encumbered.
  - The precondition that must be satisfied to spend the value.

- ``tze_inputs``: A list of pairs of:

  - An outpoint referencing a prior precondition.
  - A witness that satisfies it.

The transaction format is required to be non-malleable, in the sense that any
change to the effects of the transaction will change its transaction ID, but
any valid change to a ``witness`` inside ``tze_inputs`` will not change the
transaction ID. This will be specified in a separate ZIP.

A new version <TBD> transaction format and corresponding version group
identifier <TBD> will be introduced in the hard-fork network upgrade that

> introduces TZE functionality. The version <TBD> format differs from the version
> 4 format as follows: a length-prefixed encoding of TZE inputs and outputs are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
introduces TZE functionality. The version <TBD> format differs from the version 4 
transaction format as follows: a length-prefixed encoding of TZE inputs and outputs are
```

added to the serialized transaction format immediately following the fields
representing transparent inputs and outputs.

======== ====================== =========================== ===============
Version  Field                  Description                 Type
======== ====================== =========================== ===============
... as before
>= 1     ``tx_in_count``        variable-length integer     ``compactSize``
>= 1     ``tx_in``              list of inputs              ``vector``
>= 1     ``tx_out_count``       variable-length integer     ``compactSize``
>= 1     ``tx_out``             list of outputs             ``vector``
>= <TBD> ``tze_in_count``       variable-length integer     ``compactSize``
>= <TBD> ``tze_in``             list of TZE inputs          ``vector``
>= <TBD> ``tze_out_count``      variable-length integer     ``compactSize``
>= <TBD> ``tze_out``            list of TZE outputs         ``vector``
>= 1     ``lock_time``          block height or timestamp   ``uint32``
... as before
======== ====================== =========================== ===============

Both ``tze_in`` and ``tze_out`` vectors make use of the common serialized

> form ``tze_data`` described below. Serialization of all integral and vector

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
form ``tze_data`` described below. Serialization of all integer and vector
```

types is as with Bitcoin.

``tze_data`` encoding:

> ====================== ==================================== =====================
> Field                  Description                          Type           
> ====================== ==================================== =====================
> ``tze_id``             extension ``type``                   ``compactSize``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
====================== ==================================== ======================
Field                  Description                          Type           
====================== ==================================== ======================
``tze_id``             extension ``type``                   ``compactSize``
```

``tze_mode``           extension ``mode``                   ``compactSize``
``tze_data_len``       length of precondition/witness data  ``compactSize``

> ``tze_data``           serialized precondition/witness data ``witness_len`` bytes

Reviewer 3: `tze_data` the type also has a field called `tze_data`, this might be confusing

> ``tze_data``           serialized precondition/witness data ``witness_len`` bytes
> ====================== ==================================== =====================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``tze_data``           serialized precondition/witness data ``tze_data_len`` bytes
====================== ==================================== ======================
```

TZE Input Encoding:

====================== ==================================== ===============
Field                  Description                          Type           

> ====================== ==================================== ===============
> ``prevout_hash``       hash of previous txid                ``uint256``    
> ``prevout_in``         index into previous txn's outputs    ``uint32``
> ``witness``            witness for prevout's precondition   ``tze_data``
> ====================== ==================================== ===============

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
====================== ==================================== ===============
``prevout_hash``       previous txid                        ``uint256``    
``prevout_in``         index into previous txn's outputs    ``uint32``
``witness``            witness for prevout's precondition   ``tze_data``
====================== ==================================== ===============
```

A transaction id is already a hash

TZE Output Encoding:

> ====================== ==================================== ===============
> Field                  Description                          Type           
> ====================== ==================================== ===============
> ``amount``             spendable amount, in zatoshi         ``int64``    
> ``precondition``       precondition encumbering ``amount``  ``tze_data``
> ====================== ==================================== ===============

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
====================== ============================================== ===============
Field                  Description                                    Type           
====================== ============================================== ===============
``amount``             spendable amount, in zatoshi                   ``int64``    
``precondition``       encodes a precondition encumbering ``amount``  ``tze_data``
====================== ============================================== ===============
```

Consensus rules
---------------

Once this ZIP becomes active, the following new consensus rules are enforced:

- For each ``(outpoint, witness)`` pair in ``tze_inputs``:

  - ``outpoint`` MUST reference a precondition of the same type and mode in an already-mined
    transaction.
  - ``tze_verify(mode, precondition, witness, context)`` MUST return ``true``.

- If a transaction has non-empty ``tze_inputs`` and non-empty ``tze_outputs``, then every
  element in both fields MUST have the same ``type``.

> 

Reviewer 3: What about only tze_inputs, or only tze_outputs? Can the elements be different types?

> 
> - If a transaction has non-empty ``tze_inputs`` and non-empty ``tze_outputs``, then every
>   element in both fields MUST have the same ``type``.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- If a transaction has non-empty ``tze_inputs`` and non-empty ``tze_outputs``, then every
  element in both fields MUST have the same ``type``.

```
Down below, it implies that ``type`` should actually be ``mode``?

- Non-coinbase transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent inputs
  - nonempty shielded inputs

>   - nonempty ``tze_inputs``

Reviewer 3: Let's say explicitly here what existing consensus rule this is replacing.
https://zips.z.cash/protocol/canopy.pdf#txnencodingandconsensus

- Transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent outputs
  - nonempty shielded outputs
  - nonempty ``tze_outputs``

- All ``amount`` field values of ``tze_output`` records MUST be nonnegative and not greater
  than ``MAX_MONEY``.

> - The sum of amounts associated with all transparent ouputs and TZE outputs within 
>   a transaction MUST NOT exceed the sum of the amounts associated with transaction inputs
>   plus the sapling ``valueBalance`` amount.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The sum of amounts associated with all transparent ouputs and TZE outputs within 
  a transaction MUST NOT exceed the sum of the amounts associated with transaction inputs
  plus the Sapling ``valueBalance`` amount.
```

>   plus the sapling ``valueBalance`` amount.

Reviewer 3: @daira check the sign of these amounts?

Reviewer 2: This rule is not quite right; compare with my suggested replacement.

There's also an ambiguity of definitions about whether TZE inputs/outputs should be considered as "transparent" inputs/outputs in general. Existing consensus rules were only considering Bitcoin-style transparent inputs and outputs, but TZE inputs/outputs are also "transparent" from a security point of view. We need to consider both user-facing and specification terms carefully here. I would favour adding another adjective in front of "transparent" when we mean non-TZE.

```suggestion
- The sum of amounts going out of the transparent value pool of a transaction (that is, Bitcoin-style outputs and TZE outputs, plus JoinSplit ``vpub_old`` values) MUST NOT exceed the sum of amounts going into that pool (that is, Bitcoin-style inputs and TZE inputs, plus JoinSplit ``vpub_new`` values, plus the Sapling ``valueBalance`` amount).
```

Reviewer: I can't seem to apply this suggestion, though I could do so manually. Could you move it to the current HEAD?

Reviewer: Never mind, fixed.

Changes to signatures over transaction digests
----------------------------------------------

The newly added parts of the transaction will be included in transaction 
digests for signatures. See [#zip-0244]_ for the specification of the new

> digests.

Reviewer 3: To ensure non-malleability, we don't want to include non-witnesses in the transaction id (the hash).

contain TZE outputs without any TZE inputs may produce TZE outputs for multiple
extension-type/mode pairs as the potential for cross-protocol attacks in this
situation is negligible.

An earlier draft version of this ZIP stored the payloads inside transparent inputs and
outputs. Although this had the advantage of not requiring a transaction format change,
the consensus rules were significantly more complicated, and the design coupled the
extension logic too tightly to the transparent address logic. Instead, this ZIP uses
dedicated transaction fields, and a separate unspent output set.

Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This ZIP assumes that the base transaction format is non-malleable. However, the
``precondition`` and ``witness`` byte sequences are treated here as opaque. It is the
responsibility of ``tze_verify`` to enforce the following:

- ``precondition`` MUST be non-malleable: any malleation MUST cause ``tze_verify`` to
  return ``false``.
- The output of ``tze_verify(mode, precondition, witness, context)`` MUST be deterministic.

ZIPs defining new extension types MUST include a section explaining how any potential

> sources of malleability are handled.

Reviewer 3: For ZIPs that dictate how future ZIPs MUST be written on related topics, we should probably have these rules called out in a separate section so they aren't missed.

Reviewer: This whole section is essentially that, so I'll indicate it in the title.

This ZIP includes restrictions to prevent cross-protocol attacks, but the extension mode
is another potential attack surface. It is the responsibility of ZIPs defining new
extensions to examine the potential for cross-mode attacks within their security analysis,
and/or appropriately restrict which modes may be combined within a single transaction.

Reference Implementation
========================

TBD (link to zcashd pr)

Acknowledgements
================

The handler semantics of ``tze_verify`` were suggested by Zaki Manian, drawing on the
design of Cosmos. Daira Hopwood and Sean Bowe gave useful feedback on an early draft of

> this ZIP, and helped to analyse the various sources of transaction ID malleability.

Reviewer 3: Get transaction ID/id consistent throughout

We would also like to thank the numerous other individuals who participated in discussions
at Zcon1 that led to the earlier draft version of this ZIP.

References
==========

.. [#RFC2119] `Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Activation Mechanism <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0244] `ZIP 244: Transaction Non-Malleability Support <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/zip-0244.rst>`_
.. [#zip-draft-bolt] `Draft ZIP: Add support for Blind Off-chain Lightweight Transactions (Bolt) protocol <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/216>`_

> .. [#spec-notation] `Section 2: Notation. Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2019.0.2 [Overwinter+Sapling] <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/protocol/protocol.pdf>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. [#spec-notation] `Section 2: Notation. Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2019.0.2 [Overwinter+Sapling] <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
```

.. [#zip-0032] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/zip-0032.rst>`_

> .. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.11 [Overwinter+Sapling+Blossom+Heartwood] <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/protocol/protocol.pdf>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.11 [Overwinter+Sapling+Blossom+Heartwood] <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
```

> .. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.11 [Overwinter+Sapling+Blossom+Heartwood] <https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/protocol/protocol.pdf>`_

Reviewer 3: Update referenced version of the spec

- Non-coinbase transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent inputs
  - nonempty shielded inputs
  - nonempty ``tze_inputs``

The above rule replaces ``[Sapling onward] At least one of tx_in_count,
nShieldedSpend, and nJoinSplit MUST be nonzero`` in [#protocol_consensus]_.

- Transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
  - nonempty transparent outputs
  - nonempty shielded outputs
  - nonempty ``tze_outputs``

- All ``amount`` field values of ``tze_output`` records MUST be nonnegative and not greater
  than ``MAX_MONEY``.

- The sum of amounts associated with all transparent ouputs and TZE outputs within 
  a transaction MUST NOT exceed the sum of the amounts associated with transaction inputs
  plus the Sapling ``valueBalance`` amount.

Changes to signatures over transaction digests
----------------------------------------------

The newly added parts of the transaction, excluding witness information
(i.e. not the ``witness`` fields of TZE Input Encodings), will be included in
transaction digests for signatures. See [#zip-0244]_ for the specification of
the new digests.

> TODO: revisit this once ZIP 244 is written.

Reviewer: Add hash personalization strings for TZE input signatures.

Field                  Description                                    Type           
====================== ============================================== ===============
``amount``             spendable amount, in zatoshi                   ``int64``    
``precondition``       encodes a precondition encumbering ``amount``  ``tze_data``
====================== ============================================== ===============

Consensus rules
---------------

Once this ZIP becomes active, the following new consensus rules are enforced:

- For each ``(outpoint, witness)`` pair in ``tze_inputs``:

  - ``outpoint`` MUST reference a precondition of the same type and mode in an already-mined
    transaction.
  - ``tze_verify(mode, precondition, witness, context)`` MUST return ``true``.

- If a transaction has non-empty ``tze_inputs`` and non-empty ``tze_outputs``,
  then every element in both fields MUST have the same ``type`` in order to
  eliminate the possibility for cross-extension attacks. As this is not a
  consideration in the case that only ``tze_inputs`` or only ``tze_outputs``
  are present, the extension ``type`` MAY vary between elements in that case.

> - Non-coinbase transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
>   - nonempty transparent inputs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Non-coinbase transactions MUST have at least one of the following:

  - nonempty transparent inputs
```

  - nonempty shielded inputs
  - nonempty ``tze_inputs``

The above rule replaces ``[Sapling onward] At least one of tx_in_count,
nShieldedSpend, and nJoinSplit MUST be nonzero`` in [#protocol_consensus]_.

> - Transactions MUST have at least one of the following:
>   - nonempty transparent outputs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Transactions MUST have at least one of the following:

  - nonempty transparent outputs
```

::

  ZIP: 222
  Title: Transparent Zcash Extensions
  Owners: Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@electriccoin.co>

>   Credits: Zaki Manian <zaki@manian.org>
>            Daira Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
>            Sean Bowe <sean@electriccoin.co>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Credits: Zaki Manian
           Daira Hopwood
           Sean Bowe
```
Only Owners should have email addresses.

  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2019-07-01
  License: MIT

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200
[#zip-0200]_.

The term "prefix-free" in this document is to be interpreted as to mean that no valid
encoding of a value may have the same binary representation as any prefix of
the binary encoding of another value of the same type.

The term "non-malleable" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 244
[#zip-0244]_.

> The value MAX_MONEY is as defined in section 5.3 **Constants** of the Zcash Protocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value ``MAX_MONEY`` is as defined in section *5.3 'Constants'* of the Zcash Protocol
```

Specification [#protocol]_. 

Abstract
========

This proposal defines a modification to the consensus rules that enables complex forms of
transparent output preconditions to be deployed in network upgrades. This in turn enables the
creation of "transparent Zcash extensions" that augment the network's functionality in a
carefully-defined and auditable fashion.

Motivation
==========

Zcash supports a limited set of preconditions that may be imposed upon how funds, both
transparent and shielded, may be spent. Spending limitations on transparent funds are
defined by what may be encoded in Bitcoin script, and spending of shielded funds is
even more restricted. As such, some use cases (for example, integration of BOLT support
[#zip-draft-bolt]_) are not yet supportable. 

Transparent Zcash Extensions are intended to make it possible to incrementally
add new functionality without modifying interpretation of the existing Bitcoin
script, which is complex and potentially error-prone. Extensions may also serve 
as laboratories for evaluating demand for functionality which may eventually be 
candidates for inclusion in the consensus rules for shielded transactions.

> Conventions
> ===========
> 
> We use the following notation as defined in the Zcash protocol specification
> [#spec-notation]_, reproduced here for convenience:
> 
> - length(*S*) means the length of (number of elements in) *S*.
> 
> - { *a* .. *b* } means the set or type of integers from *a* through *b* inclusive.
> 
> - *a* || *b* means the concatenation of sequences *a* then *b*.
> 
> We reproduce the following conversion function from ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_:
> 
> - :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell(k)}` is the byte sequence *S* of length :math:`\ell/8` representing in little-endian order the
>   integer *k* in range :math:`\{0..2^\ell -1\}`.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
None of these are actually used in this document.
